Nitrogen, the most important nutrient for rice, is universally limiting the rice productivity. Nitrogen encourages the vegetative development of plants by imparting a healthy green color to the leaves. It seems that majority of Indica varieties are adapted to relatively low levels of nitrogen in the region of 25 kg N/ha. Rice plant depends mainly for its nitrogen upon the decomposition of organic matter under anaerobic conditions and in the early stages of growth takes up nitrogen in the form of ammonia which is the stable form of nitrogen in submerged soils. There are two stages in the growth of rice crop when nitrogen is most needed; early vegetative and panicle initiation stages. Fertilizing the crop during early vegetative growth promotes tillering leading to higher yield. Application at panicle initiation or early booting stage will help the plant produce more and heavier grains per panicle. Phosphorus is particularly important in early growth stages. It is mobile within the plant and promotes root development (Particularly the development of fibrous roots),tillering and early flowering. Addition of mineral P fertilizer is required when the rice plants root system is not yet fully developed and the native soil P supply is inadequate. Phosphorus is remobilized within the plant during later growth stages if sufficient P has been absorbed during early growth. It also increases resistance to disease and strengthens the stems of cereal plants, thus reducing their tendency to lodge. It offsets the harmful effects of excess nitrogen in the plant. Potassium enhances the ability of the plants to resist diseases, insect attacks, cold and other adverse conditions. It plays an essential part in the formation of starch and in the production and translocation of sugars, and is thus of special value to carbohydrate-rich crops. Involves in working of enzymes. Helps in production and movement of photosynthates to sink. Helps in proper uptake of other nutrients. Influences tillering or branching of plant and size and weight of grain. Over 80 per cent of the absorbed potassium by the plant is found in straw. Need for potassium is most likely to occur on sandy soils. Calcium combines with pectin in the plant to form calcium pectate, which is an essential constituent of the cell-wall. It also promotes the activity of soil bacteria concerned with the fixation of free nitrogen or the formation of nitrates from organic forms of nitrogen. Furthermore, it is necessary for the development of a good root system. Magnesium is an essential constituent of chlorophyll. It is usually needed by plant in relatively small quantities. Hence its deficiency in the soil is experienced later than that of potassium. Essential for the transformation of carbohydrates. Regulates consumption of sugars. The function of zinc in plants is as a metal activator of enzymes. Deficiency of zinc in lowland rice occurs in near neural to alkaline soils, particularly in calcareous soils. Availability of both soil and applied zinc is higher in upland soil than in submerged soil. Soil submergence causes decrease in zinc concentration in the soil solution. Rice crop removes 30-40 g Zn per tonne of grain. Boron facilitates the translocation of sugars by forming sugar borate complex. It involves in cell differentiation and development since boron is essential for DNA synthesis. Also involves in fertilization, hormone metabolism etc. It is an important constituent of plastocyanin (copper containing protein). It is also a constituent of several oxidizing enzymes. Important for reproductive growth. Aids in root metabolism and helps in the utilization of proteins. Cu important Manganese Mn important It is an activator of nitrite reductase and many respiratory enzymes. It is necessary for the evolution of oxygen (photolysis) during photosynthesis. Functions with enzyme systems involved in breakdown of carbohydrates, and nitrogen metabolism. Soil is a source of manganese. Silicon It is an important element for improving plant health and disease resistance. It has the potential to significantly decrease the susceptibility of certain plants to both biotic and abiotic diseases. Beneficial for the growth of paddy. An adequate supply of silica is essential for paddy to give a good yield by increasing the strength and rigidity of cells. Plant roots take up their silica as silicic acid. It is possible that the amount taken up by paddy is equal to the amount of silicic acid present in the water the roots absorb, so that the greater the amount of water transpired, the greater their uptake of silica. Si Important Top Nutritional Disorders Nutrient Deficiencies and Toxicities Nitrogen N Def N Tox LCC Deficiency Symptoms Stunted growth and yellowish plants. Older leaves of whole plants are yellowish green. Old leaves sometimes all leaves become light green. Deficiency symptoms first appear at the tip and progress along the midrib until the entire leaf is dead. Tips become chlorotic. Leaves narrow, short, erect and lemon-yellowish green. Corrective measures Do not apply large amounts of N to less responsive varieties Choose suitable plant spacing for each cultivar. Adjust the number of splits and timing of N applications according to the crop establishment method. Keep the field flooded to prevent denitrification but avoid N losses from water runoff over bunds immediately after fertilizer application. Soil application of 25 % excess of recommended N. Foliar application of Urea 1% at weekly interval till the symptoms disappear N management in paddy with leaf colour chart (LCC). Yellowing of leaves in paddy indicates the deficiency of nitrogen, but it is difficult to decide the quantity of nitrogen to be applied based on the extent of yellowing. The actual requirement of nitrogen by the crop can be correctly assessed by leaf colour chart. The leaf colour chart consists of 6 -7 green strips, 1st strip with light green colour and the last strip (6th or 7th) with dark green colour, and in between strips (2nd to 5th) are with varying intensity of green colour. Use of leaf colour chart Select fully opened disease free new leaf i.e. third leaf from the top as index leaf in paddy plant for assessing the leaf colour and ten leaves to be selected from ten plants in the field. Match the colour of the selected leaves by keeping the middle of the leaves on the colour strips of leaf colour chart and assess the colour intensity ( LCC value) during morning hours (8-10 am). Assess the intensity of leaf colour each time at a particular time by a particular individual. Take average of two if the leaf colour matches between two colour strips of the chart. Commence the assessment of the leaf colour with LCC at 14 DAT in transplanted rice or 21 DAS in direct seeded rice and continue up to flower initiation/heading at an interval of 7-10 days. Critical LCC value varies with the type of paddy genotypes. LCC critical value is 3.0 in low N response cultures. In Tamilnadu LCC critical value is 3.0 in low N response cultures like White Ponni and 4.0 in other cultivars and hybrids. Assess the average LCC values of 10 leaf samples. When the average LCC value of ten leaves or when the LCC values of five or more leaves found below the critical LCC limit fixed for that genotype, then top dress nitrogen depending on the crop growth and stage. If six or more leaves read below the specified threshold value, N can be applied @ 35 kg N/ha in dry season and 30 kg N/ha in wet season per application per ha. If the value is above the threshold value, there is no need for top dressing during that week. Nitrogen toxicity symptoms: Plants are dark green in colour Abundant foliage Restricted root system Flowering and seed setting may be retarded. Nitrogen sources Farmyard manure, Green manures, Biofertilizers (Rhizobium, AzollaAzospirillum, Azotobacter) Castor cake, Neem cake, Urea, Diammonium phosphate, Ammonium nitrate, Ammonium sulphate.